Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Ravi
Sakotopolo. She's a psychoanalyst in private practice in New
York City and a member of the faculty of
the NYU pro postdoctoral program in Psychotherapy and psychoanalysis.
And today, we're talking about her book Sexuality Beyond
Consent. Uh, RISK race traumatophilia. So, Doctor Secatopolo, welcome
back to the show. It's always a great pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you for having me back.
So I think that this is something that you
also did in your book together with Doctor An
Pellegrini, Gender Without Identity, but last time we didn't
touch too much on it. So I would like
to ask you this time and also to provide
the audience with some background here. Uh, SO you
draw from psychoanalysis and in this specific case, the
psychoanalytic theory of Jean Laplanche. So, uh, are there
perhaps some, what would these are perhaps some of
the main aspects of it that are important for
people to know, to then understand the sort of
framework you draw from and the rest of our
conversation?
Well, um, One of the key premises of Laplangian
theory, uh, and perhaps it's going to be clearer
if I contrast it with how most psychonlytic theories
being usually read, is that while we usually look
Well, usually psychoanalysis gives us the tools to think
about what is outside the reach of our consciousness,
like things that we, our motivations that we don't
know about or the ways in which traumas of
the past get turned into patterns, into relational patterns
that we then during the course of an analytic
treatment, one might discover what they are in the
hopes that once you know about them, you can
stop repeating them. La Planche gives us Ops things
up to 3 more domains. The one is to
think about aspects of our psychic life that are,
that can never be discovered, that are always elusive
to us, ways in which our motivations or our
um our ways of being in the world can
never be fully answered by knowing one's biographical history
or what kind of like larger historical context one
lives in. In other words, that there's something about
ourselves and our Um, our motivations, our desires, that
is always going to be opaque to us. And
one might say, well, how is that helping with
anything, knowing that there is something that we can
never quite get to. It's actually quite a frustrating
premise from some angle, because it means that one
can never quite reached the bottom, the bottom line
of where another person or oneself is coming from.
But what this also enlarges space for is to
begin to think about. To move away from this
tendency that we have, especially these days, to try
to totally understand somebody, to try to totally get
where they're coming from. And the idea is, and
some psychoanalytic theory goes, but also in our cultures,
we believe that if you really understand where somebody's
coming from, you can pin down the um Their
intentions, you can understand um the background of what
moves them and therefore that can help you learn
this person better. But what if there's, what if
there's always something that escapes us about each other?
What if the gap between us and other people
can never fully be closed? Now, on the one
hand, that's frustrating. On the other hand, La Planche
will say. That this is also in some way
the guarantor of our freedom insofar as there's always
going to be room, there's always going to be
something that has escaped, something we might say, thinking
with like Fred Morton and Blacks that is something
that is fugitive, that can never quite be captured
by meaning or a presentation. And the idea that
if you think about sexuality and you think about
like what draws us to other people, there's always
something that can never be reduced to who this
person is, right? Something that it feels more mysterious,
more uncapturable, and that is the basis, um, and
the condition of possibility for what can happen between
people. So that's one thing. Another thing is that
Laplacian theory starts with the premise that trauma is
something that occurs in the very, very early encounter
between a child and an adult. Um. Merely by
virtue of the generational difference between the two, the
adult has a sexual unconscious that the infant does
not yet have, and therefore, the infant is always
presented in their encounter with the adult with something
that is beyond what they can process. I'm not
thinking here about adults who are like sexually abusive
or who are overwhelming in the sense of being
like overstimulating to, to children, um. I'm talking about
kind of like the more normative ordinary way in
which adulthood has access to sexuality in a ways,
in ways that um infancy and childhood do not,
and therefore, the infant is always unprepared, we might
say for what they encounter in the adult. And
that unpreparedness forces the psyche to respond. La Planche
will call this. Uh, DESCRIBED this as a normatively
traumatic condition. It is traumatic in the sense that
it introduces in the infant's psychic life, something that
cannot quite be processed. And in the effort to
do something of that encounter, to make something of
that trauma, the psyche responds with generating meaning, but
also always fails to fully account for the foreignness
of the other. And that's what generates the child's
own infantile unconscious, unconscious life. Um, SO we begin
to see with La Planche that trauma is not
the exceptional condition that interrupts a steady state or
a previously serene state. It becomes the enabling condition
through which we also become who we are because
we are forced by this intrusion by the other
to produce things to respond to Innovate, um, to,
um, generate something new, and that generation is A
complicated one. It's both ours in the sense that
that response comes from the psyche, but it is
also not kind of like done kind of like
with your consent and it's at the border of
what you have got bargained for because you, you
don't quite bargain for everything, anything as a child,
um. So that's the second piece. And the third
piece is instance that psychosexuality is at the core
of human life, which is not to say that
everybody's thinking about sex all the time or that
sex is the most important factor in our lives,
but there's something about the anarchy and the disorder
of the sexual drive that Lines, um, everything that
we do, um, introducing that disturbance that we were
talking about earlier, which gives us the chance to
do things again and differently.
Mhm. So do, do all these aspects of trauma
that you described there from a psychoanalytic perspective and
particularly from the perspective of John Lap Blanche applied
to sexuality?
Absolutely they are in fact. Derived from um the
sexual and then begin to infiltrate the sexual Lablanche
will say well in infiltrate. Everything about our psychic
life, it will infiltrate our sense of our identity,
it will infiltrate how we do relationships, our defenses,
our ways of being in the world are our
affect. So there's not nothing that is untouched by
the sexual, which is again, I want to make
a distinction here between thinking about the sexual and
thinking about sexuality. Sexuality is usually the word that
we reserve for describing sexual preferences, sexual orientation, um,
certain sets of behaviors around sexuality or sexual fantasies,
um, so they're all sexuality is very much in
the domain of things that have become psychically represented.
The sexual is something else. The sexual is precisely
this resistance to meaning. When we were speaking earlier
about how the psyche is forced to respond, I
mentioned briefly that the psychic cannot fully respond to
everything that it's presented with from the other. Initially,
the other is the adult, eventually in life the
other becomes the small other of other people or
the capital other of kind of like whatever feels
foreign to us. Like we can never fully Call
the foreigners of these enigmatic presences in our lives,
and that creates a sense of, or rather the
fact that we cannot. Fully totalize the other's foreigners
means that there always remains in us something that
is anarchic, that is kind of like functions as
a disturbance to organized meaning. Um, AND I might
say that this is also the source of our
resistance to everything that we are. INCULCATED into thinking
about the world, about others, um, anything new that
comes from us, um, comes from that part of
the psyche.
Mhm. And what is then traumatophobia? Could you explain
that concept,
please? Yeah. No, I, I do something quite um
surprising in this book, which is that I try
to speak about trauma, not in terms of its
occurrence, whether trauma happens or not, or even if
it's sequela. Usually we talk about what happens when
the subject is traumatized, if you're traumatized. You may
suffer from some kinds of symptoms or trauma may
appear in certain ways in your everyday life, in
your relational engagements, um, in your family experiences. I
become more interested in the book. I want to
interest us in how we think about trauma, that
there are ways, most the preponderance of the ways
we think about trauma, I suggest, have a traumatopphobic
quality, and traumatophobia is a word that I draw
from La Planche who gives it to us but
doesn't quite flesh it out, and my project is
to flesh reatophobia and reophilia out. Tremorophobia is the
composite word. Trauma and hovea, which is the Greek
word for hovos, for fear, and it speaks to
the ways in which we are so frightened of
trauma. That we respond to it by recoiling into
trying to fix it. Now, this may sound very
paradoxical, so let me explain what I mean by
that. Of course, it is very natural and. Nobody
wants to be traumatized, nor should we want for
people to be traumatized. And yet traumatic encounters are
part of everyday life. They are ordinary, not in
the sense that they are just or fair, but
in the sense that they are inevitable. Maybe in
another utopian society, they're not inevitable, and we kind
of like get to. KIND of like diminish the,
the amount of harm that happens in the world,
but that's not the condition right now. So the
question becomes how do we understand the impact that
the trauma has on the human soul, on the
human psyche. And homophobic approaches treat trauma as more
or less a disaster, as destroying human life, as
bringing the catastrophe from which then subjects are left
either struggling with its implications and trying to piece
together a life so that they can hopefully return
to some pre-traumatic state. So there's this idea that
you were kind of intact, trauma breaks you, and
then the task of treatment, for example, is to
piece your pieces back together, to assemble yourself back
so that you're back to who you were before
you were traumatized. And I argue that that is
a, a phobic approach to trauma for a couple
of different reasons. First of all, because as a
practicing psychoanalyst and as somebody who is not just
seeing patients for Um, over 20 years, but also
somebody who is training other clinicians and is very
active in my field in communication with other colleagues.
I've never seen trauma being healed and neither has
any of my colleagues, uh, meaning nobody ever truly
returns to a pre-traumatic state. Nothing gets repaired back
to where it was, no matter how good your
resources or your intentions, or however motivated a patient
is, even if they have the best analyst or
therapist in the world, and all the time in
the world to do the psychic work that they
need to do. Like the psyche never quite returns
to where it was, um. And that is You
know, this brings us back to what we were
talking about earlier in terms of what La Blanche
brings to this conversation, which is that the psyche
does not return back, not because the psyche is
so damaged that it can never reconstitute itself, but
because trauma forces us to respond and we human
beings produce responses, secrete, we might say responses, vis
a vis the trauma that we have encountered that
also transform us. So, and this is what I
would call a more traumatophilic approach to trauma, like
what would it mean to think about to have
an affinity for thinking about how trauma does not
just deform us, it also forms us. It doesn't
just bend us out of shape, it also shapes
us, and that is not necessarily always the disastrous
outcome. That is that is purported to be again,
this is not to say, you know, who cares
if people get traumatized or not, nor is it
to say that we should stop whatever social justice
struggles we are engaged in to stop these kinds
of traumatic circumstances from happening. It is only to
say that for a trauma that has already happened.
And that has been the case for millennial of
for thousands of years in human life and will
continue, I think, to be the case. For trauma
that has already happened, the. To to the treatment
to to regard trauma as only breaking us overlooks
the many ways in which subjects engage with their
trauma. Now, if I were to say to you,
look, um, think about how much art and literature
comes out of. Artists relationship with their own trauma
with trying not just to express it, but also
to. Give it to to use it as a
propulsive force. Many of us would say, OK, I
understand that, but that's different, that's creativity. And indeed,
I'm trying to say more than just trauma can
be used creatively. Because when we find a trauma
in the domains of cultural production or literary production,
we welcome that kind of traumatophilic response. But when
we find it in the domains of sexuality, when
we find it in the domains of gender, when
do we find it in the domains of how
people might actually engage their trauma, rather than trying
to heal it or move away from it. It
really frightens us. And then that's, that's when we
begin to pathologize different kinds of sexualities or genders
or different modes of being in the world. So
we enjoy finding trauma, thinking to metopilically, even though
we may not be using that word when it
comes to creative endeavors, but it's really hard to
think about this in the breadth of human experience.
Mhm. Uh, AND so if not creatively, how could,
uh, just, uh, let's say a regular person could
have a traumatophilic approach to trauma.
Well, I'm not, I'm not going to say that
there's not also creative uses of trauma, so I'm
not trying to like legislate against that. But, um,
and I'm less interested in Offering like a programmatic
of how we might now treat our deal with
our trauma differently. What I'm trying to call attention
to in, in my book Sexuality Beyond Consent is
how subjects do already engage with their trauma in
traumatophilic ways, but we do not see that as
an engagement of trauma. We sometimes see it as
a symptom of trauma, as if somebody is really
stuck in their trauma and they should get over
it. So it's unlikely that you would hear somebody
say, oh, for example, Uh, somebody's writing about their
Holocaust experience, they should just leave it alone because
that's a symptom of how stuck they are on
it. Like the writings that come out of these
kinds of experiences are very well regarded and taken
very much of works of both, um, memoir and
and like of um like expansive uh psychic production.
But when we find trauma in how people have
sex or what people do with their gender, um,
or what kinds of art, I'm thinking of like
art that falls under the category of what Jennifer
Doyle has described as difficult art, art that Adorno
has described as taking us into the disaster, rather
than trying to speak about the disaster. Uh, I'm
thinking about sexual experiences, like, for example, in my
book I talk a lot about, I spent a
couple of different chapters talking about a, a work
of art, a theatrical piece that's called Slave play
that explores um black person's uh desires for racial
humiliation by white partners. Um, SO here is an
example of the sort of desire that one might
say, oh, this is definitely a traumatic. It's a
traumatic scar tissue of racism because nobody in their
right mind would want that kind of encounter, right?
Um, IF somebody, if a black person wants to
be racially humiliated, uh, then that could only come
from being, um, having been mistreated and having them.
Trauma somehow warped their sexual desire, right? Um, AND
in fact, when um this play, slave play was
first um shown in New York, it generated tremendous
controversy, precisely because I think a lot of traumatophilic
art actually becomes quite controversial because we're not accustomed
to thinking with trauma. Um, WE'RE only accustomed to
thinking about trauma or about how trauma, how people
work through their trauma, or how they try to
get over it or how they try to heal
it. Um, BUT what the example of this art
piece, but also the sexual practice of race play
forces us to think, um, I mean, if we
don't instinctively respond to it with a traumatrophobic, um,
attitude of saying this is just, um, Kind of
like the aftermath of trauma and people should not
do it because that's a traumatic effect. It, it,
it calls upon us to ask about what different
kinds of relationships you one might for forge with
their trauma. Like we tend to really appreciate subjects
who have relationships with their trauma that are very
much about commemoration or mourning or attending to their
wounds. But, and this is one of the big
arguments in the book that has to do with
my concept of tramaophilia. The thing is we're also
drawn to touch our wounds. We're drawn to relive
them. We're drawn to re-experience them, and that is
not as Some popular theory and some psychoanalytic theory
would have it because we're stuck, because we're so
stalled that we can't quite get over it, but
also because there are intensities around traumatic experience, around
the experience of rape, around the experience of a
racial violation, around the experience of all kinds of
violence that happen in our everyday lives that That
are so powerfully imprinted on us that there is
a draw sometimes to touch the wound and how
that wound is touched. I mean, that's often pathologized,
right? Um, BUT how that wound is touched under
what conditions, what relational circumstances and that makes the
difference um between a traumatic sequela and a traumatophilic
engagement with trauma, um.
So, uh, tell us then about consent, particularly from
the perspective you apply in the book, what is
consent?
Mm. Well, consent in our everyday parlance, we usually
think about consent in the context of affirmative consent
where two, usually 2, sometimes more parties contract ahead
of time as to what will occur in within
the perimeter of an interpersonal encounter. Consent Could be
discussed in the context of um like a sexual
experience or in the context of all kinds of
like even contractual obligations, um, and it starts with
the premise that you set some boundaries, the other
person agrees to respect that bound those boundaries. If
they cross them, they've violated your consent, and if
they don't cross them, then that sets the conditions
in place for a good experience. Um, AND that's
what we call affirmative consent, but affirmative consent is,
is a concept I argue in the book that
is useful only in very, very limited situations. Like,
for example, in, in an, in an experience of
a violent rape where somebody has said no and
the other person forces themselves, then obviously that's a
violation of affirmative consent that is, that is meaningful.
But consent has failed as a concept to help
us adjudicate in the way that it promises and
in the way that it is kind of a
cultural it is touted to be able to do.
It fails to deliver on its promise to secure
good encounters, pleasurable encounters, ethical encounters, and one of
the, there's many reasons for that, and many people
have written very uh smartly um. And cogently about
why. But the thing that I focus on in
my, in my book is to talk about how
consent presumes that the person who's consenting or not
consenting knows everything about themselves, and therefore they know
what they will want, what they will not want,
um. Independently of how it arises, and that if
we go back to your earlier question about La
Planche immediately comes up against the limit of how
there are things about ourselves that are opaque to
ourselves. So if we don't, if we never quite
can get to the bottom of who we are,
if we don't, if we can't always exactly predict
what the full array of what we might want
or not want. Then Then affirmative consent begins to
kind of like fray. Um, THIS is not to
say that you may not know you don't want
like these 5 things, and if you say, I
don't want them, and the other person does them,
that you've been violated, nor is it to give
a pass or an excuse for anybody to say,
well, I know you said no, but you really
wanted it, which is a classic kind of like
rape, rapist, uh, and rape apologist kind of argument.
It is to say that things arise in our
encounters with others that open up appetites or make
us curious or draw us in directions that we
may not quite anticipate as we're having this consent
negotiations. And when these moments arrive, we make. We
either give ourselves over to these moments and some
sometimes we do, sometimes we don't. So I bring
several examples in the book of how in an
intersubjective moment. One might find themselves before a desire
that is opening up in their body. For example,
I speak about a patient who describes having gone
being kind of like in a sex club with
his husband, and they are kind of like playing
around, and then this man, this really abject disgusting
man. Walks into the room, and while my patient's
husband walks away like appalled, my patient who's actually,
this is not his sexual key, it's not his
sexual idiom, finds himself all of a sudden really
fascinated by this man. And decides to engage with
him in ways that go beyond how he understands
his own self. So this gap between what you
think you bargained for in an encounter with another
person. And what arrives and how you negotiate that
distance. Like, let's say that you are before. Somebody
who. Who opens up a certain kind of desire
for you, like a patient of mine described having
negotiated very carefully a slap with her lover. They
were doing an SM scene. Her lover was going
to slap her. They negotiated all the details, and
her lover slapped her. This is how she described
it to me, exactly within the precisely within the
confines of what they had negotiated. Like she didn't
do anything that they had said. She had said
she didn't want her to do. But she said
to me, and This is almost nearly a coach.
She said, you know, but I thought that I
had negotiated a mediocre slap. Like I thought she
was gonna slap me, but then it was the
exact right part of my face, the exact right
amount of force. And my patient found herself feeling
overwhelmed with how, and this is her word, how
exquisite the slap was. Which she was not quite
prepared for. So this is not exactly like being
having her boundaries or her consent violated, right? And
yet she was so overwhelmed that she safe worded
because this distance between what she thought she was
going to get and what arrived. And how that
which arrived really excited her in ways that she
has been unprepared for was not something she was
willing to step into. So I'm beginning to talk
now about a different kind of consent that has
to do with consent that happens at the limits,
like things that we would never quite. Um, BE
able to negotiate because that there, there are the
limits of what we ourselves can come up against
and limit consent really scrambles. This idea that in
consent negotiations, there's one person who has power and
another person who doesn't, which is how affirmative consent
usually apportions things. In limit consent, there's also the
question of what kind of relationship you have with
yourself and what do you allow yourself to be
exposed to, which is at the limit of your
understanding when my patient feels that this lap is
exquisite. She doesn't quite know what she means by
that or what the danger is of continuing to
go or why all of a sudden, This unexpected
sensation comes up and that's at the limit of
her consent because she can't quite agree or not
agree to it with it in a knowing way.
She has to give herself over to something that
is more opaque in herself and in her partner,
and that is what she says no to.
So, yeah, I was actually going to ask you
particularly in cases of SM sadomasochism. Um, I mean,
is there any way of uh really determining what
is, where the line, where the line is that
separates consent from non-consensual behavior? Because, of course, as
you said in that in that specific example, uh,
they have established some Particular limitations, but if, of
course, uh, in particular context, it's, it might be
hard for participants to really stay within particular, particular
limitations. Uh, SO, uh, I mean, at what point
does it go really, I guess, uh, we're using
the title of your book Beyond Consent.
Um, I really appreciate your question because it gives
me an opportunity to say that while the, the
examples that I use right now draw from BDSM
life, I'm using a method in the book that
is actually a very Freudian method, like Freudian history
essays on sexuality says something about how he's looking
at the margins, kind of like we might say
that BDSM sexuality is marginal, at least in the
statistical sense. I don't mean this in the pathologizing
sense, right? That he's using, he's looking at the
margins to understand more about the center. So, the
examples that I bring are not specific, even though
they draw from BDSM life. They don't just apply
to BDSM experiences. I bring them up to begin
to introduce us to the notion that affirmative consent,
even in the most kind of like heterosexual, straight,
vanilla encounters, is not quite the It's not quite
as successful as it wants to be. So another
example that I bring is watching a mother and
a child interact. And so here is like a
completely non BDSM extremely coidian kind of scene where
the daughter asks the mother to be the monster
and to scare her, and they play this game
for a while where She says, scare me. And
the mother becomes like this ogre, and she starts
chasing her, and she's making this fearful sounds, and
the girl is like, 00, and then the game
is, when she says, stop, the mother stops. So
the first part of the game proceeds along the
lines of affirmative consent. Like the mother knows the
line, she respects the line, and therefore, she has
her daughter's trust. But after, after going through some
rounds of this kind of play, the daughter then
says she seems kind of bored or sated with
this kind of play and then she says, we'll
do something else. I told you to be the
monster, you scare me. I tell you to stop,
but this time you don't stop. So this is
kind of like a very, you know, anybody who
has been around children and has kind of like
tickled them or has been asked to play a
game of tickling or scaring them or surprising them,
knows that it's a very familiar kind of dynamic
moment in the sense that it is. You know
that things can go right very quickly because the
scare me could go off the rails in a
way that cannot be fully controlled ahead of time.
So what parents or adults usually do is like
tone it down, then children will always tell us,
no, but make it real. Like, I want you
to really scare me, which speaks to how there
is almost a wish to be overwhelmed, but not
to be damaged. I mean, to be overwhelmed and
to be damaged are not the same thing. So,
Here is to go back to connect that with
the earlier example, here is an invitation for something
to go beyond the bounds of what has been
contracted upon which the child, who of course is
kind of like developmentally not fully um kind of
like blossomed, is inviting something that they may or
not be able to handle. Right. As adults, we
know that when we are in our encounters with
children and we make decisions accordingly, like the mother
might decide to not play that game, because she
doesn't want things to go awry, or she might
decide to play that game and come up with
an internal framework for how she will handle it.
But I bring this example up to show that
kind of like the question of the limit in
consent is not just about extreme sexual practices or
unconventional moments. This is a very everyday moment in
the life of an adult who is parenting a
child or who's a um grown-up figure in a
child's life. That we come up against the limits
of our consent all the time, and in fact,
we flirt with those limits. Sometimes we provoke them
because we sense that there's something beyond the limit
that might be exciting or interesting or new or
give us something that snaps us out of the
ordinary, and that is a domain of a lot
of intensity. And here we go back to the
sexual, again, not a sexuality, but in a sense
of disorder and perturbation that which cannot be fully
controlled by meaning. But it's also frightening. So different
subjects will take different, some, some children or some
adults would never play those games. But it is
not only BDSM practitioners who want to play them,
and it says nothing disturbing about this child that
she wants to play that game, right? There's, this
is what I mean by being drawn to the
wounds and being, being drawn to this sense of
overwhelm. Uh, THIS is how I use the term
overwhelm in sexuality beyond consent to speak about. In,
in the, not it's in its usual way that
we use it as a noun, but it's in
its adjectival form to speak uh I'm sorry, not
in its usual adjectival form, but as a noun,
to speak about how we're drawn to states of
overwhelm. Because that's also the place from which something
new can arise. And this is what connects with
what we're saying earlier about doing things with trauma.
And that's also, you know, doing things with trauma
is always at the border of our consent because
nobody quite wants that kind of disturbance fully 100%,
and yet we're also drawn to this kind of
dysregulation in a way that is not necessarily pathological
but also court's new experience.
Right. But I was also trying to understand from
a clinical perspective, I mean, this consent or practices
that go beyond consent inform or should inform in
any way how we pathologize or not pathologize certain
kinds of behaviors. I mean, to what extent might
this sort of framework or way of thinking about
consent inform the clinical approaches?
I think quite a bit, but not in the
way that it's usually used, so, um. It would
be very, very ordinary in a therapeutic situation to
try to ascertain whether the patient consented to something
or not and use that as a criterion to
determine if the encounter was a good encounter or
a bad encounter. Um, BUT Paradoxically, even the secondolytic
encounter, even the therapeutic encounter materializes at the border
of the patient's consent. And what I mean, just
to give you another example of like how ordinary
limit consent is like a patient who walks into
my office for the first time and says to
me, how do you work or what are we
going to do here? I mean, I can say
something as basic as we're going to talk about
your feelings or we're going to think about patterns
or I'm gonna try to help you. I mean,
these are not things that I say precisely because
I think that they say nothing. I mean, it's
not until after a treatment has started and is
well underway that that those original statements can even
mean something to the patient. So, the patient, for
example, comes in and says, you know, I have
Trouble staying in relationships. I keep dating the same
kind of person. I keep having the same kind
of breakup. I need to understand what's going on
with myself. I also have some traumatic history in
my past. I don't want to talk about that.
I just want to talk about what happens in
my relationships. Now, from a consent perspective, if somebody
doesn't want to talk about something, obviously, you're not
going to like push them. But from a psychic
perspective, the question of whether there are connections between
the constant breaking up of relationships and that traumatic
past, for example, if somebody was incested, and now
that creates problems with trust, and then every relationship
that they're in it so they're so distrustful that
the other person kind of like eventually leaves them
or if they're constantly attracted to people who, or
if they become overly controlling with their partners because
they're so afraid of being hurt. Obviously, these links
are there. But any, any analyst who says to
a patient, well, you think they're not connected, but
I think they're connected, imposes something that you actually
don't know it's true you don't know if it's
connected or not, but you may find out that
it is. Neither can you say to somebody, look,
from all my years of experience and everything I've
read, I can tell you that it's possible that
they're connected because the person is telling you, I
don't want to talk about this. So you start
the treatment. In, in a, in a very paradoxical
place of limit consent where you have kind of
like a very serious intention to respect that limit,
but also hope that in the course of the
work, as the patient trusts you, as the relationship
develops, as things open up in the treatment, and
as they begin to feel perhaps a little bit
less scared, or perhaps they begin to sense the
contours of what the connections might be, something that
was off limits at the beginning becomes possible to
discuss. So to some degree, even a patient who
says, I want to talk about this, but not
about that, on some level may sense that there's
a connection. Whether that's accurate or not, you're gonna
find out, you can't know. So they're already setting
the line, hoping that The the explicit communication is,
I don't want to talk about this with you,
and that of course will always be respected, unless
things change in the way that it was describing.
But I think this is also a negotiation with
themselves, like I'm here to do this and not
that. But no therapeutic encounter, just like no relationship
works like that, you know, like people get in
relationships all the time where they say, I want
this but not that. But then you, you fall
in love or you trust the person or something
changes in you, and this thing that you said
you didn't want now becomes perhaps something you want,
perhaps something that you don't love, but you're not
willing to do. So even the notion that you're
willing to do things that you don't want completely
countermands the premise of affirmative consent, which is this
notion of ongoing enthusiasm. I mean, how many ongoingly
enthusiastic things do we do in our everyday lives?
I mean, work is one such good example. One
could not say that they're not consenting to work,
but we're not actually consenting to work in an
ongoing and enthusiastic way. Sometimes you just have to
go to work because the circumstances are such that
you have to show up. So there's, you know,
I'm giving all these different examples between work, between
the therapeutic situation, like the mother-child situation, to show
that limit consent is not an exceptional condition that
applies only in some circumstance. It actually, like, I
would say that affirmative consent, except in very few
circumstances is a scam. I mean, to put this
very bluntly, and that most of consent has to
do with the, with the, with limit consent and
with what it comes means to come up. Against
the limit of what you had thought or have
found bearable in yourself, and then you make kind
of like you tilt in different directions in terms
of how you negotiate that.
Mhm. So there are 2 more topics I would
like to ask you about. One of them, I
think you sort of touched slightly on it earlier
when we were talking about uh traumatopilia and how,
and the different kinds of manifestations of it in
the domain of sexuality. So, how does all of
these relate to what in the book you call
racialization, and what is racialization even?
Yeah. I mean, the term racialization, I used to
describe um the ways by which we become raced
and We become raced not just through the lineages
into which we're born or kind of like the
pigment of our skin or our physiognomy, like, I
mean, these are the, these were the premises of
the racial sciences of that, and I'm putting racial
sciences in quotes here because there were also racist
sciences of the 19th century, the idea that there's
a way to tell what race a person belongs
to racialization also has to do with how different
um Kind of like features are and not just
physical features, but also uh social features, psychic features
are being understood in each society. For example, um
like a Mexican, I have a colleague who is
considered to be a white Mexican in Mexico, which
is where he comes from, but he's a very
racialized subject in in uh in Northern America, which
is where he lives. So this speaks to the
mobility of racialization that race is not a static
thing, which is not the same thing as to
say that we choose it or that we selected
or that we have that kind of agency over
it. And I speak about racialization specifically in the
context of race play, um, and speak about it
in terms of how race, um, we were talking
earlier about how in the encounter with another person's
foreigners, one has, one is with that traumatic encounter,
one has to translate. And what we usually translate
through and this is something that I go over
in sexuality beyond consent in great detail. The way
in which we make meaning out of the other
person's, um, out of the encounter with the other
person's excessive excess and foreignness to us is by
drawing on codes and meanings from the meta symbolic
world. In order to attach this foreigners to presentation.
Um, SO, race, gender, um, like different kinds of
myths that we have in our cultures like the
Oedipus myth are ways in which we give meaning,
we give a shape to the formlessness of this
encounter with another person's sexual unconscious. And as we
give shape, the other elements, the other forces that
have already organized these categories. Also shape us. Here's
what I mean by that, that if that when
we give meaning through racialized categories, racialized categories also
have in them the violence of racism. There is
no category of race without racism, just like there
is no category of gender without the notion of
gender difference, and the, and that immediately calls upon
the hierarchy of gender difference or the gender binary.
So every such code that we use to respond
to the traumatic incursion of the other on us.
Is also. Infiltrated by these regimes of power and
these entire worldviews, so you use a code to
make meaning of something and in making that meaning
you also constitute your own ego. And now all
of these relations of power are part of your
own ego constitution, not because you inherited them, not
because you internalize them, but through this strange act
of agency through which you respond to the trauma
of this enigmatic. Um, A fraction of the other
intrusion of the other by drawing on the meta
symbolic. So one's own racialization, one's own gendering, one's
own understanding of oneself is not separate from. All
of these um regimes of power. And that's different
than saying, look, we are who we are, we're
born into the world, and then the world imposes
itself on us, telling us this is a good
race, this is a bad race, this is a
good gender, this is a bad gender. And then
you have like a layering of that kind of
like pollutant on top of who you are. This
is to say that that pollutant becomes part of
how you constitute yourself. So it's, it's very much
at the core of your ego. So that no
amount of education or training or DEI initiative can
Educate you differently, like you really have to. Recon
to unconstitute and reconstitute yourself. It's only these encounters
that overwhelm us that break us down that happen
at the limit of our consent that we stand
a chance to come undone in the way that
we may become redone differently and come back these
are parts of the stakes of this book.
Right. So, one last topic I want to ask
you about, which is something you also focus on
in the book, I think that toward the end,
uh, earlier, I've asked you a little bit about
BDSM and particularly the last two letters, SM7omasochism. But
now, I would like to focus specifically on sadism
and on the topic or the current, I, I
think that there are different currents, the current of
exigent sadism. So what can we learn about say
this more broadly and exigent saving more specifically through
the framework that you bring into your book?
This is, uh, this is a really um important
question and a really complicated one. IT'S actually so
complicated that I, I came to realize how important
it was to this book only as I was
finishing the book, so then I had to go
back and rewrite some of it and add another
chapter, so the book ends with sadism, and I
found it to be so important that I'm now
writing a book that is only on sadisms, um.
So I'm gonna try to say that I'm saying
all of this background to say this is very
complicated. I'm gonna try to say this in a
concise way. Um, SO sadism is a word that
usually frightens us, and for good reason, uh, in
the way that we use the word today, it's
usually understood to mean the equivalent of like some
barbaric action or some monstrous, um, violation. The word
sadism, however, starts with the Marquis dear. Uh, I
mean, it's used by um Um, um, a raft
bon ebbing for the first time in Psychopathia Sexualis,
but it is sourced from the figure of the
Marques dean, who wrote a series of philosophical and
pornographic novels. Um, WHERE there was a lot of
pornography, uh, and this is one of the reasons
why he was confined for the majority of his
life. He lived during the time of the French
Revolution. But strangely, in the midst of like these
orgies and this like really bizarre and sometimes quite
murderous and, uh, horrific sexual debauches, as he calls
them, that are happening, his main characters stop and
start philosophizing for pages and pages and pages and
give us Um, a kind of political theory that
speaks about the abuses of the state, the abuses
of church, um, the, the ways in which state
power and violence go together, and is in that
sense quite contemporary.A is also really interested in the
ways in which the sexual and the violent always
co-occur. And he's taken up in kind of like
political in some political theory through Bata Foucault is
very, Michel Foucault is very influenced by him and
then certainly in the beginning of the 20th century
by the surrealists who are very inspired by what
he's doing with questions of representation and violence in
the erotic. So, The concept of sadism has many,
many facets, including political possibility, uh, erotic complexity, um,
this co-emergence of the sexual with the violent, um,
and all of these are on the table, but
when World War 2 happens and after the Holocaust.
Um, THROUGH Adorno and Horkheimer, through Jacques Lacan's reading
of sad. We have a turn, and World War
II gives us the meaning of the word sadism
that is canonized today. So if you don't know
all of that history, which most people don't, uh,
it's, it's partly because, um, after World War II,
SAD is used by theorists of the Holocaust to
help us understand the monstrosities that happened in the
camps uh with the extermination of Jewish people. And
there we get a flattening of sadism into meaning
just one thing, like it becomes synonymous with barbarism.
It becomes synonymous with um just like brute cruelty
and violence that stops at nothing. So what I
would what I've been trying to do and what
I'm doing in my next book is open up
what I call the found of sadisms to reveal
the many pleats and many other possibilities of sadism,
and to talk specifically in sexuality beyond consent, I
end with speaking about exigent sadism, about the exigence.
Of that comes with confronting things at the limits
of their representation, perhaps breaking through kind of like
the dialectic that Hegel gives us when he talks
about uh thesis antithesis and then synthesis where the
synthetic result is always the move towards progress. That
certainly history has not proved to be the case,
um. To, to speak about a kind of um
sadism that is an offering and actually involves a
vulnerability for the sadist, which is a very strange
thing to say or hear. Like it sounds immediately
counterintuitive because we're so used to thinking about sadism
as this bad um kind of like violence that
is done to the other. So, my, um, my
project is very much about helping us think about
what it means to be confronted with things that
challenge us. We think that really might even precipitate
the kind of crisis of overwhelmed that we were
describing earlier, the kind of crisis that might deliver
us if we step into our own limit consent.
Deliver us to the possibility of becoming undone and
redone, and we are so frightened as human beings
culturally too, but like the ego does not want
itself to be deposed. It doesn't want to come
undone. So the ego, our ego will do everything
to keep itself stable and to preserve itself. So
a different kind of force is required for it
to surrender its dominion over the psyche and to
follow the exigency of the unconscious to follow this
opacity. That we were talking about earlier, to which
it's also drawn, we, we're talking earlier about the
draw to the uh to overwhelm or the draw
to our wounds. There's a draw, but there's also
like a reservation or a conservation of psychic energy.
Action and sadism takes the risk, and it's a
risk. It's a risk for the sadist and it's
a risk for the person receiving it, of daring
into these territories where we're not constituted and safe,
and we're not preserving ourselves, but where we risk
ourselves. And I have a lot to say in
sexuality beyond consent about what kinds of transformative experience
can come out of that. And in, in my
forthcoming work, I'm talking also about the political possibilities
on the level of political philosophy of what can
come out of the state of overwhelm and kind
of like the potentiality of crisis, um.
Great. So, the book is against sexuality beyond consent,
risks, race, stromatophilia. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of this interview. And Doctor Sekketopolo,
just before we go apart from the book, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
So, uh, people can follow information about uh my
talks and my publications on my website. It's www.avikitupulu.com.
Um, AND I'm also very active on Instagram. If
people follow me or reach out to me there,
I'm happy to engage. I'm always interested in what
people think of the book, and my handle on
Instagram is Agolus 98 AVG O L I S
98. Um.
Great. So I'm adding that to the description and
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show again. It's always a great
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you. Thank you for this wonderful questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.